README.md, before:

# tinyAgent‑lite — Minimal TypeScript Agent Framework

**tinyAgent‑lite** is a stripped‑down TypeScript port that captures the essence of the original Python‑based **tinyAgent** framework in roughly 150 lines of code. It showcases how decorators, metadata, and a single LLM call can create a fully‑functional AI agent that discovers and executes local tools.

---

## 1 . Project Structure

```text
src/
├── decorators.ts   # @model and @tool decorators + metadata registry
├── agent.ts        # base Agent class • LLM orchestration • tool runtime
├── index.ts        # demo CalcAgent with two math tools
├── multiplierAgent.ts # demo MultiplierAgent with one math tool
├── final-answer.tool.ts # always-run tool returning the agent's answer
└── triageAgent.ts  # simple agent listing tools for manual selection
```

---

## 2 . Quick Start

First, please make sure you have Node.js and npm installed.

```bash
# 1 . Clone the repository and install dependencies
git clone <repository-url>
cd tinyagent-ts && npm install

# 2 . Provide your OpenRouter key
echo 'OPENROUTER_API_KEY="sk-or-..."' > .env

# 3 . Run the CalcAgent demo
npx ts-node src/index.ts
```

Example prompt/response:

```text
{"tool":"add","args":{"a":1,"b":2}}
{"observation":"3"}
{"tool":"final_answer","args":{"answer":"3"}}
```

By default the agent makes a single tool call. Increase `maxSteps` in
`MultiStepAgent` (or `runMultiStep`) if you expect longer chains.

See the new `/examples` directory for walkthroughs of the strict `final_answer` flow.

Every conversation **must** terminate with `{ "tool": "final_answer", "args": { "answer": "..." } }`. Plain text replies are rejected.

### Final answer format

Agents expect the very last message from the model to be a JSON object calling `final_answer`:

```json
{"tool": "final_answer", "args": {"answer": "your final text"}}
```

Trailing narration is ignored, so ensure the JSON appears on its own line if possible.

The agent demos will ask an LLM (via OpenRouter) whether it should answer directly or call one of its local tools, then print the final reply. The `multiplierAgent.ts` specifically uses `dotenv` to load the key from the `.env` file. The `TriageAgent` simply lists your available tools and prompts you to pick one.

---

## 3 . How It Works

1. **Tool declaration**

   ```ts
   @tool('Sum two numbers', z.object({ a: z.number(), b: z.number() }))
   add({ a, b }) { return String(a + b); }
   ```

   - `@tool` stores **name, description, Zod schema, and method** in metadata.
   - Runtime validation ensures bad arguments are rejected early.

2. **Agent execution flow**

   1. Build a _system prompt_ that lists every tool.
   2. Send `[system, user]` messages to the chosen LLM (`@model`).
   3. The LLM must respond with a JSON tool call **for every step**:

      - Validates `args` using the stored Zod schema.
      - Executes the bound class method.
      - Sends `TOOL_RESULT` back to the model for a polished answer.

   4. The conversation ends **only** when the model calls the `final_answer` tool with the final text.

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    Task[User Task]
    Memory[agent.memory]
    Generate[Generate from agent.model]
    Execute[Execute Code action - Tool calls are written as functions]
    Answer[Return the argument given to 'final_answer']

    Task -->|Add task to agent.memory| Memory

    subgraph ReAct[ReAct loop]
        Memory -->|Memory as chat messages| Generate
        Generate -->|Parse output to extract code action| Execute
        Execute -->|No call to 'final_answer' tool => Store execution logs in memory and keep running| Memory
    end

    Execute -->|Call to 'final_answer' tool| Answer

    %% Styling
    classDef default fill:#d4b702,stroke:#8b7701,color:#ffffff
    classDef io fill:#4a5568,stroke:#2d3748,color:#ffffff

    class Task,Answer io
```

3. **Extensibility**

   - **Add tools** → just decorate another method.
   - **Change model** → swap the string in `@model('provider:model')`.
   - **Replace LLM backend** → adjust the fetch endpoint & headers.

## Prompt Templates

The framework ships with a tiny `PromptEngine` offering default templates like
`greeting`. Markdown files under `src/core/prompts/system` are automatically
loaded as templates (e.g. `agent.md`, `retry.md`). Pass an object to the
constructor to override any built-in template or call `register()` to add new
ones. You can also drop a new `.md` file in that directory and call
`loadDir()` to make it available. Registering an existing key throws an error
saying `already exists — use overwrite()`. To force replacement, use
`overwrite()`. You can also point to a specific file when constructing a
`PromptEngine` to override a built-in template:

```ts
const engine = new PromptEngine({}, { agent: '/path/to/my.md' });
```

---

## 4 . Design Highlights

| Decision                        | Rationale                                                   |
| ------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------- |
| Decorators + `reflect‑metadata` | Zero boilerplate for users; rich runtime metadata.          |
| Zod schemas on tools            | Strong arg validation and IDE‑friendly typings.             |
| Two‑turn tool loop              | Lets the model _act → observe → refine_ like ReAct pattern. |
| Single file per concern         | Keeps cognitive load minimal; ideal teaching skeleton.      |

---

## ReAct Implementation

TinyAgent‑TS now mirrors the strict Thought→Action→Observation loop from [the ReAct paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03629). Key pieces:

1. **Prompt & reasoning** – a single `react` prompt enforces explicit `Thought`, `Action`, and `Observation` fields.
2. **Typed objects** – `ThoughtStep`, `ActionStep`, and `ObservationStep` interfaces keep memory structured.
3. **Scratchpad / memory** – the `Scratchpad` class renders steps back into chat messages for the model.
4. **Execution loop** – `MultiStepAgent` cycles through the scratchpad until a `final_answer` action is returned.
5. **Debug & transparency** – pass `--trace` (or `trace: true`) to log each `T/A/O` triple as it happens.
6. **Docs & example** – see `src/examples/react.ts` for a minimal JSON‑tool agent using these pieces.
7. **Reflexion** – after each Observation, the agent sends `Reflect:` for a self-critique and optional fix.

---

## 5 . Next Steps

- **Streaming** responses (`streamText`) for UI‑friendly progress.
- **Retry / back‑off** wrapper for transient LLM errors.
- **Rate‑limiting & caching** per tool (mirroring the Python original).
- **Dynamic agent factory** to auto‑generate new tools at runtime.

---

## License

MIT — free to fork, hack, and grow.

Commit message:

Improve JSON parsing and agent error handling

README.md, after:

# tinyAgent‑lite — Minimal TypeScript Agent Framework

**tinyAgent‑lite** is a stripped‑down TypeScript port that captures the essence of the original Python‑based **tinyAgent** framework in roughly 150 lines of code. It showcases how decorators, metadata, and a single LLM call can create a fully‑functional AI agent that discovers and executes local tools.

---

## 1 . Project Structure

```text
src/
├── decorators.ts   # @model and @tool decorators + metadata registry
├── agent.ts        # base Agent class • LLM orchestration • tool runtime
├── index.ts        # demo CalcAgent with two math tools
├── multiplierAgent.ts # demo MultiplierAgent with one math tool
├── final-answer.tool.ts # always-run tool returning the agent's answer
└── triageAgent.ts  # simple agent listing tools for manual selection
```

---

## 2 . Quick Start

First, please make sure you have Node.js and npm installed.

```bash
# 1 . Clone the repository and install dependencies
git clone <repository-url>
cd tinyagent-ts && npm install

# 2 . Provide your OpenRouter key
echo 'OPENROUTER_API_KEY="sk-or-..."' > .env

# 3 . Run the CalcAgent demo
npx ts-node src/index.ts
```

Example prompt/response:

```text
{"tool":"add","args":{"a":1,"b":2}}
{"observation":"3"}
{"tool":"final_answer","args":{"answer":"3"}}
```

Every tool call is followed by an `{ "observation": ... }` message from the agent.
Reply with another JSON action or finish with `final_answer`.

By default the agent makes a single tool call. Increase `maxSteps` in
`MultiStepAgent` (or `runMultiStep`) if you expect longer chains.

See the new `/examples` directory for walkthroughs of the strict `final_answer` flow.

Every conversation **must** terminate with `{ "tool": "final_answer", "args": { "answer": "..." } }`. Plain text replies are rejected.

### Final answer format

Agents expect the very last message from the model to be a JSON object calling `final_answer`:

```json
{"tool": "final_answer", "args": {"answer": "your final text"}}
```

Trailing narration is ignored, so ensure the JSON appears on its own line if possible.

The agent runs in a small loop: tool call → observation → new tool call, up to a few steps. If the model keeps choosing bad tools or invalid arguments twice in a row, the loop stops with an error message. The `multiplierAgent.ts` demo uses `dotenv` to load the key from the `.env` file, while `TriageAgent` simply lists your available tools.

---

## 3 . How It Works

1. **Tool declaration**

   ```ts
   @tool('Sum two numbers', z.object({ a: z.number(), b: z.number() }))
   add({ a, b }) { return String(a + b); }
   ```

   - `@tool` stores **name, description, Zod schema, and method** in metadata.
   - Runtime validation ensures bad arguments are rejected early.

2. **Agent execution flow**

   1. Build a _system prompt_ that lists every tool.
   2. Send `[system, user]` messages to the chosen LLM (`@model`).
   3. The LLM must respond with a JSON tool call **for every step**:

      - Validates `args` using the stored Zod schema.
      - Executes the bound class method.
      - Sends `TOOL_RESULT` back to the model for a polished answer.

   4. The conversation ends **only** when the model calls the `final_answer` tool with the final text.

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    Task[User Task]
    Memory[agent.memory]
    Generate[Generate from agent.model]
    Execute[Execute Code action - Tool calls are written as functions]
    Answer[Return the argument given to 'final_answer']

    Task -->|Add task to agent.memory| Memory

    subgraph ReAct[ReAct loop]
        Memory -->|Memory as chat messages| Generate
        Generate -->|Parse output to extract code action| Execute
        Execute -->|No call to 'final_answer' tool => Store execution logs in memory and keep running| Memory
    end

    Execute -->|Call to 'final_answer' tool| Answer

    %% Styling
    classDef default fill:#d4b702,stroke:#8b7701,color:#ffffff
    classDef io fill:#4a5568,stroke:#2d3748,color:#ffffff

    class Task,Answer io
```

3. **Extensibility**

   - **Add tools** → just decorate another method.
   - **Change model** → swap the string in `@model('provider:model')`.
   - **Replace LLM backend** → adjust the fetch endpoint & headers.

## Prompt Templates

The framework ships with a tiny `PromptEngine` offering default templates like
`greeting`. Markdown files under `src/core/prompts/system` are automatically
loaded as templates (e.g. `agent.md`, `retry.md`). Pass an object to the
constructor to override any built-in template or call `register()` to add new
ones. You can also drop a new `.md` file in that directory and call
`loadDir()` to make it available. Registering an existing key throws an error
saying `already exists — use overwrite()`. To force replacement, use
`overwrite()`. You can also point to a specific file when constructing a
`PromptEngine` to override a built-in template:

```ts
const engine = new PromptEngine({}, { agent: '/path/to/my.md' });
```

---

## 4 . Design Highlights

| Decision                        | Rationale                                                   |
| ------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------- |
| Decorators + `reflect‑metadata` | Zero boilerplate for users; rich runtime metadata.          |
| Zod schemas on tools            | Strong arg validation and IDE‑friendly typings.             |
| Two‑turn tool loop              | Lets the model _act → observe → refine_ like ReAct pattern. |
| Single file per concern         | Keeps cognitive load minimal; ideal teaching skeleton.      |

---

## ReAct Implementation

TinyAgent‑TS now mirrors the strict Thought→Action→Observation loop from [the ReAct paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03629). Key pieces:

1. **Prompt & reasoning** – a single `react` prompt enforces explicit `Thought`, `Action`, and `Observation` fields.
2. **Typed objects** – `ThoughtStep`, `ActionStep`, and `ObservationStep` interfaces keep memory structured.
3. **Scratchpad / memory** – the `Scratchpad` class renders steps back into chat messages for the model.
4. **Execution loop** – `MultiStepAgent` cycles through the scratchpad until a `final_answer` action is returned.
5. **Debug & transparency** – pass `--trace` (or `trace: true`) to log each `T/A/O` triple as it happens.
6. **Docs & example** – see `src/examples/react.ts` for a minimal JSON‑tool agent using these pieces.
7. **Reflexion** – after each Observation, the agent sends `Reflect:` for a self-critique and optional fix.

---

## 5 . Next Steps

- **Streaming** responses (`streamText`) for UI‑friendly progress.
- **Retry / back‑off** wrapper for transient LLM errors.
- **Rate‑limiting & caching** per tool (mirroring the Python original).
- **Dynamic agent factory** to auto‑generate new tools at runtime.

---

## License

MIT — free to fork, hack, and grow.
